----
category: Work
create_date: 2012-04-14
description: This is the narrative of my first month working as an IT Consultant / Web Developer at a big outsourcing company - AGAP2.
title: My First Month as an IT Consultant
excerpt: A month ago I've written about how <a href="http://diogoosorio.com/blog/entry/my-first-big-job-interview" target="_blank">my first big interview</a> had been an huge success. Well I got the job and since the 15th of last month I'm working for <a href="http://www.agap2.com/" target="_blank">AGAP2</a> as a PHP Web Developer. <a href="http://www.agap2.com/" target="_blank">AGAP2</a> is a Portuguese IT company whose main business area is outsourcing. For someone without any previous experience in working in this regime, I was kind of thrown to the "wolf's layer" (aka the client's office) the day after I signed my contract. This is the narrative of my first month as an IT consultant. 
keywords: it consutant, outsource it consultant, agap2, web developer, php web developer
slug: my-first-month-as-an-it-consultant
----

It's more than official. [My first big job interview](../blog/entry/my-first-
big-job-interview)&nbsp_place_holder;has earned me a job doing what I love,
surrounded by the technologies I love the most.

I'm officially part of the
[AGAP2](http://www.agap2.com/)&nbsp_place_holder;consultant team. For those
who don't know
[AGAP2](http://www.agap2.com/)&nbsp_place_holder;is&nbsp_place_holder;a
Portuguese IT company, specialized in outsourcing - the company have
continually&nbsp_place_holder;been growing for the past 5 years. Their
headquarters are located in Picoas (Lisbon) from where they manage a large
team of consultants.

After the interview I found very little documentation about how a company like
AGAP works. I simply couldn't find any report of someone who actually had
undertaken the process I was about to undertake and who wrote about it.

This entry is an attempt to enlighten a bit anyone who might be thinking of
integrating an IT Outsourcing company but isn't quite sure what to expect.

### How does a company like AGAP2 work?

For those who have no experience on how an IT Outsourcing company runs (I've
just found out I did neither until a month ago), you basically have a small
team on the headquarters. Besides the business support units (Human Resources,
Marketing, ...) there are around two dozens of Managers. The vast majority of
the consultants are allocated to a client (or a number of clients) and work
directly at the client's office.

The "Manager" figure is quite peculiar. They are a mixture of salesman and
project leaders. They are tasked with finding new projects, negotiate
contracts, find the right consultant for the job and then to manage the
consultant's action within the project.

As a consultant my manager is responsible for my career and has a great
interest in assuring that I'm happy, working in something that I like and
somewhere where I can really shine. As he's commercially responsible for the
client where I get placed, he's absolutely interested that I'm really able to
shine - that means more business opportunities and ultimately a bigger
paycheck for him at the end of the year.

On the other hand he's my direct boss. This might sound weird but in fact
works pretty well - my Manager's success depends on my own success. If he is
able to distinguish the kind of project I'm right for, I'll be happily
hacking/coding everyday something I can be excited about and he'll share my
happiness by having an happy customer.

Needless to say that this "co-dependency" means that my relationship with my
manager is very relaxed, we're both basically there to kick-ass and mutually
interested that everything works out for both of us.

&nbsp_place_holder;

### Is something like AGAP2 for me?

If you're young, eager for adventure and want to gather as much experience as
you possibly can - absolutely YES. Being an outsourcing company you'll
probably get in contact with a lot of people, a lot of technologies and a lot
of methodologies.

As AGAP2 is hired on a project basis, chances are that you'll be jumping from
client to client on a regular basis. This might sound frightening but from my
experience so far, it's not that bad - people expect for you to be an expert
(they hired AGAP exactly to get an "expert" on a certain technology) and they
really value your opinion.

On the other hand I don't see myself working in this regime forever. The night
before being assigned to a new project you start to get that nervous tickling
feeling - Will I be able to do what I'll be tasked to? Will the people I'll
end up working with OK? How's the working environment?

In my modest opinion AGAP2 is an excellent place for you to start you career
at. On the technical side you'll be in contact with people with all sorts of
backgrounds - professionals who really know what they are doing and similarly
persons who clearly don't have a clue about what they're doing. You'll get in
touch with a lot of code, a LOT of bad code, a LOT of hard challenges, heck
once in a while you'll even find that small bit of code that is so good, so
perfect that will almost make you cry.

If you're someone who likes a tough challenge, who is ready to tackle on even
the ugliest, meanest code ever written and still deliver the end solution
while preserving your sanity and ultimately you're someone who values being
around different people and environments, then yes this is a challenge you
should take some point down the road.

&nbsp_place_holder;

### What have you been up to?

Well the first project I got assigned to was a small design agency. They
manage the website of a big multinational furniture shop.

I've been basically fixing wholes on an application with no sense of direction
at all and that has been developed by 5 or 6 different guys. A real mess and
definitely a challenge...

More recently I've been tasked to develop an institutional website for yet
another company. I had total freedom to implement the solution in whatever
technology I thought would work the best - WordPress was a natural choice.

Meanwhile I had a very tough/fun 3 hour interview at
[SAPO](http://www.sapo.pt/) and I got in. After a brief month doing my thing
in minor projects, AGAP2 gave me the opportunity to work at the company that's
the reference regarding Open Source technologies. I'm supposed to start
working there next Wednesday. :)

And that's basically it. I could go on telling you all the bad and great code
I've seen, all the people I've met, all the peculiar situations I've been
faced with (things like getting too early to the office, getting in and not
knowing what desk I should sit in - seems silly but it's a very uncomfortable
situation, lol) - but this entry will suffice for now.

I definitely want to write about my interview at [SAPO](http://www.sapo.pt/)
(made every other job interview look absurdely simple) and about a couple of
things I've been using (go check it out -
[Slim](http://www.slimframework.com/) and
[Twig](http://twig.sensiolabs.org/)), so do keep checking in from time to
time!

