----
category: Freelancer
create_date: 2012-03-16
description: This is narrative of my first day of job hunting, how I got two interviews in 50 minutes (literally) and my first interview... ever. 
title: My First Big Job Interview
keywords: interview, job hunting, employer, technical interview, behavioural interview
slug: my-first-big-job-interview
----

### Phase 1 - The Surprise

So yesterday I set out to look for a new professional challenge. After a while
working as a freelancer, the fact that I had to stay home almost every day,
doing small not very "innovative" tasks forced me to rethink if that was what
I really wanted for myself.

After creating my plain, old, boring resume following the "European Standard"
I've decided that it didn't reflect a bit what I was, what I could do, or what
I wanted to myself. So I've spent the last week developing a [micro-
site](http://cv.diogoosorio.com) that would basically place my professional
and educational record on [Facebook's timeline](http://cv.diogoosorio.com).

Yesterday I've sent 5 emails replying to open positions for PHP developers. As
you might imagine, for the first "batch" I've chose the companies where that I
really wanted to work for - places that are contradicting the negative
economic tendency and were full of people with ambition and talent. To be
honest at the time I wasn't even sure that those companies would even look at
the resume, but hey I had nothing to loose, so why
not?![](../../public/images/blog/surprised.jpg)

I swear that within 25 minutes I received the first call. After surpassing the
initial mental block (it took me a while to assimilate that the call was
indeed related to the mail I've sent a couple of minutes before), I had an
interview booked for the next morning.

Needless to say I immediately panicked. I hadn't wear a suite for a couple of
years now (and I'm getting FAT, so I didn't quite fit in my old suite), my
hair looked a lion's mane and I besides the quick research I had done prior to
sending the email with my resume, I had little idea about what the company I
had apply to (and to be prepared is, in my opinion, the greatest weapon at any
given situation).

While I was still processing what had to be done - go buy a suite, get an hair
cut, learn a bit about the company - I got a second call. Wait, what? Another
interview - Sure I'd like to meet you and your company. No, tomorrow morning I
can't, I already have another commitment. Yes, Monday morning will do
perfectly fine for me.

&nbsp_place_holder;In 50 minutes I've scored 2 interviews in 2 companies I
hand picked because I really wanted to work there. I still can't believe it
and I praying to any god that may exist that this great start will lead me to
a great place to work. :)

&nbsp_place_holder;

### Phase 2 - Behavioural Interview

Anyway, after dealing with the first panic attack I had what had to be done,
I've made myself presentable and researched what was possible about the
company. Unfortunately I didn't have the time to do a quick review on what
could be asked during the technical interview - in my gut I knew XML would be
a topic and well, I confess that I hadn't work with XML for a long
time.&nbsp_place_holder;

![](../../public/images/blog/int.gif)

I woke up early, got in the shower, shaved, had a decent breakfast (not very
usual) and gave a quick look at the news. At 9AM I got into the train and at
9:45AM I arrived to the company's office.&nbsp_place_holder;

After waiting a bit outside (the interview was scheduled to start at 10:15), I
walked in and was told to wait a bit for the interviewer. And the fun stuff
got started...

The first part of the interview was a personal / professional assessment. The
usual stuff I assume - I walked through my resume with the interviewer
detailing what I had done on each one of my previous professional experiences.

&nbsp_place_holder;We talked about what I like doing and what I expected that
my future would be like. Finally the interviewer gave me a deeper
understanding about how the company worked and what they believed in. I
interrupted a couple of times with some genuine questions - "If I get the
position, what will I do precisely?", "What is the company's policy regarding
people who are employed but still studying?".

&nbsp_place_holder;This part of the interview was a breeze. I loved what I was
hearing and I guess the interviewer also liked what I had to tell him. During
the process I got the impression that this interview would be the first and if
it went well, I would get called another time for the technical interview.

&nbsp_place_holder;I don't know if I got that wrong, or I simply caused an
impression because suddenly the technical interview just got re-scheduled for
"right now". "Well great - I can wrap this up right know", I immediately
thought.

&nbsp_place_holder;

### Phase 3 - Technical Interview

I was left alone with yet another interviewer. This time clearly an IT guy and
as my previous experiences had proven me already, the IT guy always wants to
get straight to the point - a solution either work or it doesn't (I remember
thinking that if I had to conduct a technical interview, I'd probably assume
the exact same posture).

And then everything went terribly wrong. First question - you guessed it
freaking XML. What are namespaces used for (or something like that). I
immediately froze. My brain immediately suffered a buffer overflow. To be
honest I really don't remember what I answered, but it was wrong. Even worst I
immediately started staggering and from that point on, no matter what I said
it just didn't feel right...![](../../public/images/blog/php-interview-
questions.jpg)

&nbsp_place_holder;At that point I remember thinking of those trendy posters
"Keep calm and carry on". I faked not understanding the next question and took
the time to recompose.&nbsp_place_holder;After that disaster I imagine the
interviewer started to guess what I knew. Were I a complete incompetent? Was I
wasting his time?

Second question, what's the difference between a GET and a POST request. As
basic as it gets, right? I think I was so nervous at that point that
everything I said seemed terribly wrong, although the question (and the
answer) were absurdly easy.

From there I was asked about how an HTTP request was processed and what
information could be sent through the HTTP header. I mentioned cookie
information - what's that, I was immediately asked. Damn this guy must think
I'm stupid, I officially hated XML by now.

But after that questions started to seem more adequate. What was Cross-site
scripting and how to prevent it? What was an SQL injection and how to prevent
it? Do you know what a stored procedure is? Please establish an one-to-many
relation between these tables. Please redo the DB schema and assume a many-to-
many relation between these tables. What do you call this record right here (a
foreign key)? Do you know Javascript? What have you developed using HTML5?

I guess I managed to give a couple of satisfactory answers, at least the
interview wasn't abruptly ended.

&nbsp_place_holder;

&nbsp_place_holder;

### Phase 4 - Dig a Little Deeper&nbsp_place_holder;

With the technical part out of the way I made my second big mistake. I was
asked why I would want to work there. You know that awkward moment when you
are fully aware that you shouldn't be say to you're about to say and despite
that fact, you just can't contain your words? Well that happens to me... a
LOT.

I said the first thing it came to my mind without thinking about it - "Uh,
well there's a financial motivation.". Warning to everyone - this is not what
the interviewer wants to hear when he asks you why you'd want to integrate its
team.

![](../../public/images/blog/hole.jpg)The thing is I was fully aware that I
shouldn't have said that. The reply was swift and utterly destructive - "Yeah
but one does not work just for money. Do you work just to obtain some money at
the end of the month?". Am I stupid or what?

Although to be able to pay the rent is a very persuasive benefit of having a
job, you should mention everything else you like about you do - except saying
that you're in it for the money. And the truth of the matter is that I think
that even if I had all the money of the World I'd still want to work. Sure I
would cut down the hours, sure I'd have someone to do everything that I
wouldn't want to do - but I'd still work.

I love what I do, I love that fuzzy feeling of passing by someone in college
and realizing they are using one of your websites. I love tough puzzles,
debating opinions, long nights coding like crazy. I can't imagine my life
without having a professional challenge to look forward to.

Well once again I immediately tried to overcome yet another error. I said what
I've should have said in the first place and apparently also got through that
lump successfully.&nbsp_place_holder;

The interviewer finally made me a last question - "So what do you have to
offer our company?". I think I got this one right - I'm passionate about what
I do, I enjoy working with a team, I'm an enthusiast, â€¦

&nbsp_place_holder;

### Phase 5 - Profit! Really?!

And then surprise nr. 3. After what I thought had been an awful technical
interview, I hear something like: "Diogo, I'm going to be straight with you. I
think you have the right profile and I want you to integrate our team. I'm
hopping to get the process approved by the management and I really hope to
call you next week with further news. Meanwhile if you happen to get another
offer, please get in touch - I'd like to speak with you before you accept
anything.".

What just happened? My first batch of emails, my first interview (ever) and I
might as well have hit an home-run on my first try. Is this even fair? Is this
even possible? Is this guy mocking me? All these thoughts crossed my mind.
It's funny how often we are utterly unprepared for success.

Anyway I just wanted to share this experience, I think it might be useful for
someone, somewhere. If I have time, Monday I'll try to update the blog and
tell you how the second interview went.

&nbsp_place_holder;

_PS - As you might have guessed I intentionally kept&nbsp_place_holder;__the
company's name&nbsp_place_holder;__undisclosed. Although I don't think it
could affect the outcome, I don't want to ruin it and I really don't think
it's appropriate to disclose who am I referring to, without their permission._

